RepoPilot Phase 10 - Interview Explanation

What is Phase 10?
-----------------
Before Phase 10, RepoPilot could read a repository, understand code, answer
questions, and suggest a change plan. But it could not safely modify code.

Phase 10 adds controlled code modification. It can prepare a code change in a
temporary copy of a repository, show the developer the real diff, validate the
change, run approved tests, and report the result.

The important point is: it does not change the developer's original repository.


Simple workflow
---------------
1. The developer asks for a change.
   Example: "Change the login validation message."

2. RepoPilot reuses the Phase 9 CHANGE_PLAN action.
   This creates a high-level plan using repository information already built by
   earlier phases.

3. The LLM proposes structured changes, not shell commands.
   A proposed change looks like this:

   {
     "file_path": "src/login.py",
     "operation": "replace",
     "start_line": 10,
     "end_line": 12,
     "new_content": "new code here"
   }

4. RepoPilot checks every proposed change before writing anything.

5. It applies valid changes only inside RepoPilot's temporary cloned workspace.

6. It creates a real before-and-after diff from the files on disk.

7. It validates the modified code. Python files receive syntax validation.

8. It selects a known test command from repository configuration. For supported
   Python repositories, this is the fixed command: Python -m pytest.

9. It returns a human-reviewable result containing the plan, proposed changes,
   applied changes, diff, validation result, test result, warnings, and errors.


Why structured changes instead of shell commands?
-------------------------------------------------
An LLM must never be allowed to generate a command such as deleting files,
installing packages, or running arbitrary scripts.

Instead, RepoPilot accepts only three controlled operations:
- create a new allowed text file
- replace a known line range in an existing file
- delete an allowed file

Every operation has a file path and is validated by normal Python code before
it is applied. This makes the behavior predictable and auditable.


How is the original repository protected?
-----------------------------------------
RepoPilot already clones repositories into a temporary directory. Phase 10
reuses that clone as its only workspace.

All file paths must stay inside that workspace. RepoPilot rejects:
- absolute paths
- path traversal such as ../../etc/passwd
- symlinks that point outside the workspace
- unsupported file types
- files that look sensitive, such as secret, token, credential, or api_key files
- files that are too large

So the original local repository is not edited. Phase 10 also does not commit,
push, create pull requests, deploy, or install dependencies.


How are changes validated?
--------------------------
After changes are applied to the temporary workspace, RepoPilot:
- checks that modified paths are still safe
- checks that resulting content is valid UTF-8 text
- checks Python syntax with Python's built-in compiler
- creates a real unified diff from the file contents

If validation fails, RepoPilot restores the temporary workspace to its state
before the change. The result still retains the diff and failure information so
the developer can understand what happened.


How are tests kept safe?
------------------------
The LLM cannot choose or generate a test command.

RepoPilot uses a fixed policy. If it recognizes a Python test layout, it runs:

Python -m pytest

The test process uses shell=False, has a timeout, captures standard output and
error output, limits how much output is kept, and receives a scrubbed
environment so unrelated environment secrets are not passed to it.

If tests fail or time out, RepoPilot rolls back the temporary workspace changes
and reports the failure. If no supported test setup is found, it reports that
tests are not available instead of guessing a command.


Key classes and responsibilities
--------------------------------
ModificationService
  Runs the complete Phase 10 workflow: plan, generate, apply, diff, validate,
  test, and report.

WorkspaceTools
  Provides safe and limited file operations inside the temporary workspace.

ValidationService
  Runs deterministic post-change checks, including Python syntax validation.

TestRunner
  Selects and runs only allowed test commands with timeout and output limits.

AgentState and AgentResult
  Store workflow progress and provide a clear result for developer review.


How Phase 10 reuses earlier phases
----------------------------------
Phase 1/2: temporary repository clone and repository file model
Phase 6/7: retrieval and grounded reasoning infrastructure
Phase 8: repository architecture context
Phase 9: CHANGE_PLAN action and existing LLMProvider abstraction
Phase 10: controlled modification, validation, testing, and reporting

The project continues using the existing GroqProvider and GROQ_API_KEY setup.
It does not add a second LLM provider or add LangGraph.


Short interview answer
----------------------
"Phase 10 turns RepoPilot from a read-only code assistant into a controlled
code modification assistant. It first reuses the existing Phase 9 planning
system, then asks the LLM for structured edit records instead of shell commands.
Those records are validated and applied only in a temporary cloned workspace,
never in the original repository. RepoPilot generates a real diff, validates
the edited files, runs only a fixed approved test command with a timeout, and
returns the result for human review. Unsafe paths, arbitrary commands, secrets,
commits, pushes, deployments, and automatic dependency installation are all
blocked. If validation or tests fail, the temporary changes are rolled back."


Testing
-------
Phase 10 has offline tests for file creation, replacement, deletion, diffs,
path traversal rejection, symlink escape rejection, malformed LLM output,
syntax-validation rollback, failed-test rollback, and test timeout handling.
